
--- PAGE 1 ---
4-1CHAPTER 4: CREDIT UNDERWRITING
Overview
Topic Title Page
1 General Underwriting Information 4-2
2 Income – Required Documentation and Analysis 4-5
3 Income Taxes and Other Deductions 4-22
4 Assets and Closing Requirements 4-24
5 Debts and Obligations 4-26
6 Debts Owed to the Federal Government 4-31
7 Credit History – Required Documentation and Analysis 4-35
8 Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS) 4-41
9 How to Complete VA Form 26 -6393, Loan Analysis 4-48
10 How to Analyze the Information on VA Form 26 -6393, Loan Analysis 4-53

--- PAGE 2 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-2Topic 1: General Underwriting Information
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Unde
rwriting Information  
VA Underwriting Standards require lenders to always utilize the following guidance when 
underwriting VA- guaranteed loans:
Lenders are encouraged to make VA loans to all qualified Veterans who apply. VA’s 
underwriting standards are intended to provide guidelines for underwriters. Decisions must 
be based on sound application of the standards, and underwriters are expected to use good 
judgment
 and flexibility in applying underwriting guidelines. Not all possible circumstances 
are addressed  therefore, underwriters must apply reasonable judgment and flexib ilit y in 
administering this important Veterans’ benefit.
b.Basic Requirements  
By law, VA may only guarantee a loan when it is possible to determine that the Veteran is a 
satisfactory credit risk, and has present or verified anticipated income that bears a pr oper 
relation to the anticipated terms of repayment.
VA’s underwriting standards are incorporated into VA regulations at 38 C.F.R. 36.4340 and 
explained in this chapter. This chapter addresses the procedures for verifications and analysis 
involved in underwriting a VA -guara nteed loan. In the event the lender fails to perform their 
responsibilities, VA may take administrative actions including removal of authority to 
underwrite and close VA loans.
c.Lender’s Responsibility  
Lenders are responsible for:
·developing  all credit  information,
·properly obtaining all required  verifications  and the credit  report,
·ensuring the accuracy  of all information  on which the loan decision is based,
·complying with the law and regulations governing VA’s  underwriting standards, and 
with VA’s underwriting policies, procedures, and guidelines, and certifying as to 
compliance with all of the above.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 3 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-3Topic 1: General Underwriting Information, continued
d.Lender’s Procedures  
Digital signatures can be accepted as an original signature or wet signature as defined by the 
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, commonly referred to as the E -
sign Act.
The procedures on the table below address only the credit underwriting of the loan. Chapter 5 
of this handbook provides all procedures that must be completed when making a VA loan.
Table 1: Lender’s Credit Underwriting Procedures
Step Action
1 Initiate the VA and Credit Alert Interactive Voice Response System  (CAIVRS) 
inqui ries described in Topic 4, Subsection c of this chapter.
2 Obtain all necessary verifications.
The borrower’s authorization can be obtained separately for the lender’s required 
verifications, or on one blanket authorization form.
The Certificate of Eligibility (COE) obtained from WebLGY provides verification of 
the amount of the Veteran’s available entitlement, verification of exempt/non -exempt 
from the VA Funding Fee, and the amount of VA monthly service connected disability 
compe nsation. Order the COE before ordering the VA appraisal.
The tri -merged credit report and verifications can be ordered by the lender or its agent 
or a party designated by the lender to perform that function. However, these documents 
must always be delivere d by the credit reporting agency or verifying party directly to 
the lender or its agent, and never to another party. VA only permits the Veteran to pay 
for the credit report invoiced amount, not any additional costs that the lender may incur 
through other parties for obtaining the credit report.
3 Complete VA Form 26 -6393 , Loan Analysis , in conjunction with a careful review of the 
loan application and supportin g documentation. Provide any explanations in Item 47 - 
Remarks.
The form is not required for Interest Rate Reduction Refinancing Loans (IRRRL) except 
IRRRLs to refinance delinquent VA loans.
4 Indicate the loan decision in Item 51 of the VA Form 26 -6393 , Loan Analysis , after 
ensuring that the treatment of income, debts, and credit is compliant with VA 
underwriting standards.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 4 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-4Topic 1: General Underwriting Information, continued
e.Underwriting Special Types of Loans  
The underwriting standards and procedures explained in this chapter generally apply to 
purchase and regular “cash -out” refinance loans. However, some special underwriting 
considerations also apply and can be found in Chapter 7 of this handbook.
f.Refinancing Loans  
The underwriting standards detailed in this chapter apply to purchases and regular “cash- out” 
refinances. IRRRLs generally do not require any underwrit ing unless the loan is delinquent. 
IRRRLs made to refinance VA loans 30 days or more past due must be submitted to VA for 
prior approval underwriting. The underwriter must have concluded that:
·the circumstances  that caused the delinquency have  been  correct ed, and
·the Veteran  can successfully  maintain  the new loan.
·Refer to Chapter 6 of this handbook for details on all types of refinancing loans.

--- PAGE 5 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-5Topic 2: Income – Required Documentation and Analysis
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Un
derwriter’s Objectives  
It is the underwriter’s objective to identify and verify income available to meet:
·the mortgage  payment,
·other  shelter  expenses,
·de
bts and obligations, and
·family living expenses.
b.Effective Income  
Income is considered effective when it is determined to be verifiable, stable and reliable, and 
anticipated to continue for the foreseeable future. Income analysis is not an exact science. It 
requires the lender to underwrite eac h loan on a case-by-case basis, using good judgement 
and flexibility when warranted.
To determine whether income is stable and reliable, the probability of continued employment 
must be determined through examination of the:
·borrower’s  past employment  recor d,
·borrower’s  training, education, and qualifications  for his or her  current position, and/or
·type of employment.
·Only verified income can be considered in the repayment calculation.
c.Spousal Income  
Verify and treat the income of a spouse who will be contra ctually obligated on the loan the 
same as you would the income of a Veteran borrower that will be obligated on the loan. 
However, to ensure compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), do not ask 
questions about the income of the borrower’s spouse unless the:
·spouse will be contractually  liable,
·borrower  is relying on the spouse’s  income  to qualify,
·borrower  is relying on alimony, child  support, or separate  maintenance payments from 
the spouse or former spouse, or
·borrower  resides and/or the property is  in a community property state.
In community property states, information concerning a spouse may be requested and 
considered in the same manner as for the borrower, even if the spouse will not be 
contractually obligated on the loan. See Topic 5, subsection a, of this chapter for additional 
guidelines for community property states when considering a spouse’s debts and credit 
history.
The non -purchasing spouse’s (NPS) credit history does not need to be considered; however, 
the NPS’  liabilities  must be considered to determine  the extent of the household liabilities.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 6 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-6Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
d.ECOA Considerations  
Always inform the borrower (and spouse, if applicable) that they do not have to divulge 
information on the receipt of child support, alimony, or separate maintenance. However, for 
this income to be considered in the loan analysis, it must be divulged and verified.
Income cannot be discounted because of sex, marital status, age , race, or other prohibited 
bases under ECOA.
e.Income from Non -Military Employment  
Verify a minimum of 2 years of employment. Generally, in the borrower’s current position, 2 
years of employment is a positive indicator of continued employment.
If the borrow er has been employed by the present employer less than 2 years:
·verify  prior  employment, plus present  employment  covering a total of 2 years, or
·provide an explanation of why 2 years  of employment  could not be verified,
·compare any different types of employment verifications obtained (such as Verification  
of Employment (VOE),  paystub(s), W2s, and tax returns) for consistency, and
·clarify  any substantial  differences  in the data that would have  a bearing on the 
qualification of the borrower(s).
Use of Employment Verification  Services
Lenders may use any employment verification service that provides the same information as 
the “full” verification generated through the “Work Number” for all applicants. Generally, 
this will include the following informatio n:
·the current  date,
·employer name  and address,
·Veteran’s  full legal  name, social  security  number (complete  or truncated) and job title,
·employment  status  (Active  or Inactive),
·length of employment and start date,
·salary  rate and pay frequency,
·average  hours per pay period,
·summary  of year  to date information  including base pay, overtime, commissions and 
bonuses, and reference number  for the verification.
A current paystub is not required with an automated employment verification service.
Additionally, any VA Form 26 -8497, Request for Verification of Employment (VOE) may 
be an original, faxed, or emailed copy of the original. Previously, VA required an original 
VA Form 26-8497. The requirements for obtaining a paystub have not changed. Hence, the 
paystub may be an original or a copy certified by the lender to be a true copy of the original.
The lender may not charge a fee to obtain the employment verification information .
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 7 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-7Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
e.Income from Non -Military Employment, continued  
Verification with VA Standard Documentation
Acceptable verification consists of VA Form 26-8497 , Request for Verification of 
Employment (VOE) or any format which furnishes the same information as VA Form 26-
8497, plus:
·paystub(s)  covering the most  recent 30-day period  with year-to-date information, if the 
employer normally provides a pay stub(s) to the borrower.
·if the employer does not indicate the probability of continued employment on the VOE, 
the lender is not required to request anything additional on that subject.
The VOE and paystub(s) must be no more than 120 days old (180 days for new construction) 
from the closing date.
·For loans closed automatically,  the date of the VOE and pay stub(s) must  be within  120 
days of the date the note is signed (180 days for new construction) from the closing 
date.
·For prior  approval loans, the date of the VOE and paystub(s)  must  be within  120 days 
of the date the application  is received  by VA (180 da ys for new construction) from the 
closing date.
The VOE must be an original document or an electronic copy. The paystub(s) may be an 
original, electronic, or a copy certified by the lender to be a true copy of the original 
document.
Additional documentation for a borrower(s) employed in building trades or other seasonal or 
climate -dependent work must provide, in addition to the standard documentation (VOE and 
pay stub(s)), the following:
·Documentation of the borrower’s total earnings year -to-date,
·Signed and dated individual income tax returns for the previous 2 years, and
·If the borrower works out of a union, evidence of the union’s history with the borrower.
Alternative Verification Documentation
Alternative documentation may be submitted in place of a VOE if the lender concludes that 
the borrower’s income is stable, reliable, and anticipated to continue for the foreseeable 
future; that is, if the borrower’s income qualifies as effective income. Two years of 
employment with the same employer is not required to reach this conclusion.
Al
ternative documentation consists of:
·paystub(s) covering at least the most  recent 30-day period with  year-to date 
information,
·W-2 Forms  for the most  recent 2 years,  and/or 
·t
elephone verification  of the borrower’s  current  employment.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 8 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-8Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
e.Income from Non -Military Employment, continued  
Document the date of the verification and the name, title, and telephone number of the person 
with whom employment is verified.
If the employer is not willing to give telephone verification of the borrower’s employment or 
if verification is in any way questionable, use standard documentation. Alternative 
documentation cannot be used.
Paystub(s) and W -2 forms may be originals, electronic, or copies certified by the lender to be 
true copies of the originals.
f.Borrower Employed for Less than 12 Months  
Generally, employment less than 12 months is not considered stable and reliable. H owever, 
the lender may consider the employment stable and reliable if the facts and documentation 
warrant such a conclusion.
Determine whether the borrower’s past employment, training, and/or education equipped him 
or her with particular skills that relate  directly to the duties of their current position.
If the probability of continued employment is high based on these factors, then the lender 
may consider including the income in the total effective income.
An explanation of why income  of less than 12 months duration was used must be documented 
on the VA 26 -6393, Loan Analysis .
If the probability  of continued employment  is good,  but not well supported, the lender may 
utilize the income if the borrower has been employed at 12 months, to partially offset debts 
of 6 to 24 months duration. An explanation of why income  was used to offset  debts must  be 
documented on the VA 26 -6393, Loan Analysis .
A borrower may have a valid offer of employment which will begin at or after the anticipated 
date of closing which can be ver ified. All data pertinent to underwriting procedures should be 
considered. However, a paystub(s) may not be available.
g.Recent History of Frequent Changes of Employment  
Short-term employment in a present position combined with frequent changes of 
employment  in the recent past requires special consideration to determine stability of income. 
Analyze the reasons for the changes in employment.
Give favorable consideration to changes for the purpose of career advancement in the same 
or related field.
Favorable co nsideration may not be possible for changes with no apparent betterment to the 
borrower and/or changes from one line of work to another.
If the lender includes the borrower’s income, an explanation of why income of short- term 
employment was used, must be documented on VA Form 26 -6393, Loan Analysis .
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 9 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-9Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
h. Income from Overtime Work, Part Time Jobs, Second Jobs, and Bonuses 
Generally, such income cannot be considered stable and reliable unless it has continued and 
is verified for 2 years. To include income from these sources as income:
·the income must be  consistent,
·there must be a reasonable likelihood that it will continue in the foreseeable  future  
based  on its compatibility  with the hours of duty and other work conditions of the 
borrower’s primary job and,
·how long the borrower  has been  employed under  such an arrangement.
The lender may use this income, if not eligible for inclusion in income, but verified for at 
least 12 months, to offset debts of 6 to 24 months duration. An explanation of why the 
income was used to offset must be documented on VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis .
i.Income from Commissions 
Verify commission income by obtaining the VOE or other written verification which 
provides the following:
·the actual  amount of commissions  paid year -to-date,
·the basis  for payments (salary  plus commission,  straight  commission,  or draws against 
commission, or other), and
·when  commissions  are paid bi-weekly, monthly, quarterly, semiannually, annually, or 
other.
·individual income tax returns, signed and dated, plus all applicable schedules  for the 
previous 2 years (or  additional periods if needed  to demonstrate a satisfactory earnings 
record).
Analyze  Income Derived from Commissions
Generally, income from commissions is considered stable when the borrower has obtained 
such income for at least 2 years. Employment for less than 2 years cannot usually be 
considered stable unless the borrower has had previous related employment and/or 
specialized training. Employment of less than 1 year can rarely qualify; however, in- depth 
development is required for a conclusion of stable income on less than 1 year cases .
For a borrower who will qualify using commission income of less than 25 percent of the total 
annual employment income, IRS Form 2106 expenses are not required to be deducted from 
income even if they are reported on IRS Form 2106 . Additionally, the expenses are not 
required to be added as a monthly liability for the borrower.
For a borrower earning commission income that is 25 percent or more of annual employment 
income, IRS Form 2106 expenses must be deducted from gross commission income 
regardless of the length of time the borrower has filed the expenses with the IRS.
One exception is an automobile lease or loan payment. An automobile lease or loan 
payments are not subtracted from the borrower’s income; they are considered part of the 
borrower’s recurring monthly debts/obligations in Section D on VA Form  26-6393, Loan 
Analysis .
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 10 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-10Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
j.Self-Employment Income Analysis Guidelines  
Obtain a current financial statement in an industry recognized accounting format including:
·Year -To-Date Profit and Loss statement (if the most recent year’s tax return  has not yet 
been  prepared,  provide a profit  and loss statement  for that year),
·current  Balance  Sheet, and
·individual income tax returns, signed and dated, plus all appl icable schedules  for the 
previous 2 years (or  additional periods if needed  to demonstrate a satisfactory earnings 
record).
·If the business is a corporation or partnership, include copies of the signed federal 
business income tax returns for the previous 2 years with all  applicable  schedules, and a 
list of all  stockholders or partners showing the interest each holds in the business.
The financial statements must be sufficient for an underwriter to determine the necessary 
information for loan approval.
Financial Statements, including a year -to-date Profit and Loss Statement and Balance Sheet 
must be completed after one -half of the tax -year has passed to verify current income and 
stability of the income.
The lender may require an accountant or Certif ied Public Accountant- prepared financial 
statements if needed to make such a determination due to the nature of the business or the 
content of the financial statements
Analyze  Income  Derived  from Self -Employment
Generally, income from self-employment is considered stable when the borrower has 
obtained such income for at least 2 years. Less -than-2-years cannot usually be considered 
stable unless the borrower has had previous related employment and/or specialized training. 
Less-than-1 -year can rarely qualify; however, in -depth development is required for a 
conclusion of stable income on less-than-1- year cases.
Determine whether the business can be expected to generate sufficient income for the 
borrower’s future needs.
If the business shows a steady or significant decline in earnings over the period analyzed, the 
reasons for such decline must be analyzed to determine whether the trend is likely to 
continue or be reversed.
If it is difficult to determine the probability of continued operation, obtain documentation on 
the viability and potential future earnings, and an explanation of the function and financial 
operations of the business from a qualified party.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 11 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-11Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
j.Self-Employment Income Analysis Guidelines , continued  
Deductions and Expenses Claimed on Tax Returns
Depreciation claimed as a deduction on the tax returns and financial statements of the 
business may be included in effective income.
Business or roll over losses must be considered from all tax returns.
What is reported to the IRS on a joint return must be used when applying for a federally 
guaranteed loan.
On a joint tax return, the loss must be deducted from the borrower’s income in both 
community and non-community property states.
On a joint tax return, when a borrower and co -borrower have been faced with business 
losses, the Veteran/borrower and his/her spouse may want to consider both being on the loan 
in order to potentially qualify. The credit of both borrowers will be considered.
k.Active Military Borrower’s Income  
For active -duty military borrowers, a Leave and Earnings Statement (LES) is required 
instead of a VOE. The LES must be an original, electronic, or a copy certified by the lender 
to be a true copy of the original.
The LES must furnish the same information as a VOE and must be no more than 120 days 
old (180 days for new construction), from the date of closing.
For loans closed automatically, the date of the LES must be within 120 days of the date the 
note is signed (180 days for new construction).
For prior approval loans, the date of the LES must be within 120 days of the date the 
application is received by VA (180 days for new construction).
In addition, identify servi cemembers who are within 12 months of release from active duty or 
the end of their contract term. For an enlisted servicemember, find the date of expiration 
(ETS) of the borrower’s current contract for active service on the LES. For National Guard or 
Reser ve members, find the ETS of the borrower’s current contract on the LES. Also, if a 
National Guard or Reserve member is currently serving on active duty, also identify the 
expiration date of the current active -duty tour. If the date is within 12 months of t he projected 
date that the loan will close, the loan package must also include one of the following items, 
or combinations of items, to be acceptable:
·documentation that the servicemember has already re -enlisted or extended his/her  
period of active  duty to a date  beyond  the 12-month period following the projected 
closing of the loan, or
·documentation that the servicemember has already re -enlisted or extended his/her  
period of active -duty service  to a date beyond the 12 -month period following the 
projected c losing of the loan, or
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 12 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-12Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
k.Active Military Borrower’s Income , continued  
· verification of a valid offer of local civilian employment and/or verification  of military  
retirement  income  following the release  from active -duty service, or
·verification of a valid offer of local civilian employment and/or verification  of military  
retirement  income  following the release  from active -duty service,  or
·a statement from the servicemember that he/she intends to re -enlist or extend his/her 
period of active -duty service to a date beyond the 12- month period, plus (1) a 
statement from the servicemember’s commanding officer confirming that the 
servicemember is  eligible to re -enlist or extend his/her active -duty service as indicated, 
and (2) the commanding officer  has no reason to believe  that such re -enlistment  or 
extension of active-duty service will not be granted, or
·documentation of other unusual strong positive underwriting factors, such as a 
downpayment of at least 10 percent from the borrower’s own assets (not a gift), a 
minimum of 6 months PITI, in cash, after the downpayment from the borrower’s own 
assets (not a gift) or clear evidence of strong ties to  the community coupled with a non-
military spouse’s income so high that only minimal income from the active -duty 
servicemember is needed to qualify.
If an Officer has an ETS date listed as 888888 or 000000 on his or her LES, the above 
documentation is not required unless there is evidence that the Officer has resigned his or her 
commission.
Example : An Active Duty Veteran’s LES indicates her ETS date listed on her LES is 
171031 (October 31, 2017) and the projected date of closing is October 1, 2017. Therefo re, 
one of the above items is needed to verify future income since her ETS date is less than 12 
months from the projected date of closing.
Example : A member of the Reserves has been called to Active Duty. The ETS date on his 
LES indicates 181031 (October 31, 2018); however, his active duty orders indicate his active 
duty tour will not exceed the next 60 days.
Therefore, since he will be leaving active duty before 12 months of the projected closing 
date, the active -duty income cannot be considered, and his civilian employment and drill 
duty will need to be considered.
Example : An Active Duty Veteran’s LES indicates his ETS date is less than 1 month from 
the anticipated date of closing, and he indicates he will be receiving military retire ment and 
has accepted civilian employment. Verify his future retirement income from the Department 
of Defense and verify future civilian employment with the Veteran’s new employer.
Analysis  of Base Pay
Consider the borrower’s base pay as stable and reliabl e unless the borrower is within 12 
months of release from active -duty service. Analyze the additional documentation submitted. 
If the borrower will not be re -enlisting, determine whether the borrower’s anticipated source 
of income is stable and reliable, a nd/or unusually strong underwriting factors compensate for 
any unknowns regarding future sources of income.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 13 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-13Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
k.Active Military Borrower’s Income , continued  
If an Officer has an ETS date listed as 888888 or 000000 on his or her LES, the above 
documentation is not required unless there is evidence that the Officer has resigned his or her 
commission.
Analysis of  Military Quarters Allowance/ Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH)
Include a military quarters allowance in effective income if properly verified. In most areas, 
there will be an additional variable housing allowance, which can also be included. The 
military quarters and variable housing allowances are not taxable income. The lender must 
verify the amount of BAH the Veteran will receive. The BAH amount will change from one 
duty station to another.
Ensure that the borrower meets the occupancy requirements set forth in Chapter 3 of this 
handbook.
Verification  and Analysis of Basic Allowance for Subsistence (BAS) and Clothing 
Allowances
Any subsistence (rations) and clothing allowances are indicated on the LES. The lender may 
include verified allowances in effective income. These allowances are not taxable income . 
The clothing allowance generally appears on the LES as an annual amount. Convert the 
annual amount to a monthly amount for the Loan Analysis.
Verification  and Analysis  of Other Military Allowances
To consider a military allowance in the underwriting analysis, obtain verification of the type 
and amount of the military allowance, how long the borrower has received it and the 
continuance into the foreseeable future.
Military allowances may be included in effective income only if such income can be 
expected t o continue because of the nature of the borrower’s assigned duties. Such 
allowances include, but are not limited to:
·proficiency  pay, such as linguistic,  parachute,  scuba, flight  or hazard pay, and
·overseas  or combat  pay (sea pay, submarine, etc.)
All types of allowances above are subject to periodic review and/or testing of the recipient to 
ascertain whether eligibility for such pay will continue. Only if it can be shown that such pay 
has continued for a prolonged period and can be expected to continue because of the nature 
of the recipient's assigned duties, should the income be added to base pay. Contact the 
borrower’s chain of command if there are questions regarding the continuance of the income.
If the duration of the military allowance cannot be determined, this source of income may 
still be used to offset short term obligations of 6 to 24 months duration.
Consult the IRS to determine if any allowances for pay are considered taxable income by the 
IRS, unlike housing, clothing, and subsistence allow ances.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 14 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-14Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
l.Income and Analysis of Income from Service in the Reserves or National Guard  
Income derived from service in the Reserves or National Guard may be used if the borrower 
has served in such capacity for a period of time sufficient to indicate a good probability that 
such income will continue beyond 12 months. The total period of active-duty and reserve 
service may be helpful in this regard. Otherwise, this income may be used to offset 
obligations of 6 to 24 months duration.
Income from Recently  Activated  Members  of the  Reserve or National Guard
Lenders must consider if a borrower, whose  income is being used to qualify for a loan, may 
have a change in income due to participation in a Reserves/National Guard unit subject to 
activation.
If an activated Reserves/National Guard member applies for a loan, they must present orders 
indicating th eir current active duty tour is not to exceed 12 months.
Example : The borrower’s full-time civilian employment is $3,000 per month. The 
borrower’s current income from the Reserves due to activation is $3,500 per month and 
orders are for 12 months. Since the borrower’s full -time civilian employment is only $3,000 
per month, the $3,000 should be used to qualify the borrower.
There are not any clear -cut procedures that can be applied to all cases. Evaluate all aspects of 
each individual case, including credit history, accumulation of assets, overall employment 
history, and make the best decision for each loan regarding the use of income in qualifying 
for the loan.
It is very important that loan files be carefully and thoroughly documented, including any 
reasons for using or not using Reserve/National Guard income in these situations.
As a lender, the goal is to provide the Veteran their benefit without placing him/her in a 
financial hardship.
m.Verification and Analysis of Income of Recently Discharged Veterans or Veterans to be 
Discharged from the Military  
See the Income from Non -Military Employment in Topic 2, subsection e of this chapter for 
verification requirements.
Obtain verification that any of the following income types apply:
·employment  income,
·retirement  income, and/or
·VA disability  income.
VA disability income is considered a benefit and does not need to be documented for the 
likelihood of continuance.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 15 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-15Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
m.Verification and Analysis of Income of Recently Discharged Veterans or Veterans to be 
Discharged from the Military , continued  
VA disability income verification will be placed on the COE. However, there are some 
instances where this income is not placed on the COE which may include if the Veteran:
·wi
ll be discharging within  the next 6 months from  the military  and has completed a 
Physical Exam Board (PEB) or Medical Review Board (MEB) and will be filing for 
VA disability while still on active duty,
·has recently filed for VA disability and VA’s Compensation Service has  not yet made  a 
determination  and would be entitled  to receive  VA disability benefits,
·would be entitled  to receive  VA disability  benefits,  but for the receipt of retired pa y,
·has received  VA disability  benefits in the past, or
·is
 an unmarried surviving spouse of a Veteran who is eligible for or receiving  
qualifying Disability  and Indemnity  Compensation (DIC),  or
·is in receipt  of a VA  nonservice  connected  pension, or
·has a VA -appointed Fiduciary  to handle financial  matters.
If the Veteran falls under one of the above categories, perform the following:
·Submit by fax VA Form 26-8937 ,Verification of VA Benefits, to the VA  Regional 
Loan Center  (RLC)  where  the subject  property  is located. VA will complete and return 
the form to the lender by return fax.
·Provide any supporting documents, including the COE, if it states to send VA Form 26-
8937 ,Verification of Benefits to VA, to verify a Veteran’s monthly income from VA.
Please note that if VA’s Compensation Service has not yet issued a memo rating and/or 
completed a claim for a Veteran, then the amount the Veteran may receive in the future 
cannot be determined until the claim has been completed.
Until the Veteran begins receiving the monthly award, the amount cannot be placed on the 
COE. A VA awards letter can be used  to verify the amount and date a future monthly VA 
compensation award will begin. However, the COE may be updated to reflect if the Veteran 
is exempt from paying the VA funding fee on a future disability award. See Chapter 8 of this 
handbook for funding fee exemptions.
The loan cannot be submitted for prior approval, or approved under the automatic procedure, 
until the lender obtains the completed form from VA when the Veteran or surviving spouse is 
under one of the above categories in subsection m of this topic. The lender must maintain the 
completed form with the loan package.
If the form indicates that the borrower receives a non service -connected pension or has a VA 
Fiduciary, the loan cannot be closed automatically. The loan must be uploaded in WebLGY 
for prior approval. See Chapter 5 of this handbook for the necessary documentation that must 
be submitted to VA.
VA must review, underwrite, and issue a Certificate of Commitment before the loan can 
close. See Chapter 5 of this handbook for prior approval p rocedures.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 16 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-16Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
m.Verification and Analysis of Income of Recently Discharged Veterans or Veterans to be 
Discharged from the Military , continued  
VA’s Pension Service may also have to review and/or approve the application in addition to 
Loan Production. The VA RLC will coordinate with the Pension Service upon receipt of the 
underwriting package.
Allow for additional processing time of a prior approval loan application when 
Compensation and/or Pension Service must also review.
Analysis of Prospects for Continued Employment
Cases involving recently discharged Veterans often require the underwriter to exercise a 
great deal of judgment and flexibility in determining whether the employment income will 
continue in the foreseeable future. This is because some Veterans may have little or no 
employment experience other than their military occupation.
Continuity of employment is essential for a Veteran with no retirement income, or 
insufficient retirement income, to support the loan obligation. If the duties the borrower 
performed in the military are similar or directly related to the duties of the present position, 
use this as one indicator that the employment is likely to continue.
Most cases fall somewhere between these extremes. Fully develop the facts of each case to 
make a determination. The guidelines under Self-Employment Income in Topic 2, subsection 
j of this chapter provide guidance for a recently discharged Veteran who is sel f-employed.
n.Rental Income  
When all or a portion of the borrower’s income is derived from rental income, documentation 
and verification of the income are necessary to determine the likelihood of continuance.
Verification of Rental Offset of the  Property Oc cupied  Prior to  the New Home
Obtain a copy of the rental agreement for the property, if any.
Analysis  using  Rental Offset of the  Property Occupied  Prior to  the New Loan
Use the prospective rental income only to offset the mortgage payment on the rental 
property, and only if there is not an indication that the property will be difficult to rent. This 
rental income may not be included in effective income.
Obtain a working knowledge of the local rental market. If there is not a lease on the property, 
but the l ocal rental market is very strong, the lender may still consider the prospective rental 
income for offset purposes. Provide a justificat ion on VA Form 26-6393 ,Loan Analysis .
Reserves are not needed to offset the mortgage payment on the property the Veteran occupies 
prior to the new loan.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 17 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-17Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
n.Rental Income , continued   
Example  [Rental Offset of the Property Occupied Prior to the New Loan] : The Veteran’s 
current home has a VA mortgage with a monthly PITI payment of $1,000. Bonus entitlement 
is being used to purchase a new primary residence and the Veteran will rent the previous 
home for $1,200 monthly upon closing of the new home. The payment of $1,200 can be used 
to offset the existing mortgage payment, if all the above conditions are met. The additional 
rent received in excess of the mortgage payment cannot be used as effective income.
Verification of Rental Property Income
Obtain the foll owing:
·documentation of cash  reserves  totaling  at least 3 months mortgage payments (PITI), 
and
·individual income  tax returns, signed and dated  or lender  obtained tax transcripts, plus 
all applicable schedules for the previous 2 years, which show rental income generated 
by the property.
If the borrower has multiple properties, the borrower must have 3 months PITI documented 
for each property to consider the rental income.
If there is not a lien on the property, 3 months reserves to cover expenses s uch as taxes, 
hazard insurance, flood insurance, homeowner’s association fees, and any other recurring 
fees should be documented for the property(ies).
Equity in the property cannot be used as reserves.
Cash proceeds from a VA refinance cannot be counted as the required PITI on a rental 
property. The reserve funds must be in the borrower’s account before the new VA loan 
closes.
Gift funds cannot be used to meet reserve requirements.
Analysis of Rental Property Income
Each property(ies) must have a 2-year rental history itemized on the borrower’s tax return.
Property depreciation claimed as a deduction on the tax returns may be included in effective 
income.
If after adding depreciation to the negative rental income, the borrower still has rental loss , 
the negative income should be deducted from the overall income as it reduces the borrower’s 
income.
If rental income will not, or cannot be used, then the full mortgage payment should be 
considered and reserves do not need to be considered.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 18 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-18Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
n.Rental Income , continued   
Verification of Multi -Unit Property Securing the VA loan
The Veteran/borrower must occupy one unit as his/her residence.
For purposes of determining the VA guaranty, lenders are instructed to reference only the 
One-Unit Limit column in the FHFA Table “Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Maximum Loan 
Limits for Mortgages, located  at https:/ /www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Downloads .
Verify cash reserves totaling at least  6 months mortgage payments (PITI), and documentation 
of the borrower’s prior experience managing rental units and/or use of a property 
management company to oversee the property.
Analysis of Multi -Unit Property Securing the VA loan (Veteran will occupy on e unit as 
his/her residence)
Include the prospective rental income in effective income only if:
·the borrower has a reasonable likelihood of success as a landlord, and
·cash reserves totaling at least 6 months mortgage payments (PITI).
If each unit is separate and not under one mortgage, 6 months PITI must be verified for each 
separate unit.
Equity in the property cannot be used as reserves to meet PITI requirements. This must be 
the borrower’s own funds, not a gift.
Cash proceeds from a VA regular “Cas h-Out” refinance cannot be counted as the required 
PITI on a rental property. The reserve funds must be in the borrower’s account before the 
new VA loan closes.
The amount of rental income to include in effective income is based on 75 percent of the 
amount indicated on the lease or rental agreement unless a greater percentage can be 
documented (existing property).
The amount of rental income to include in effective income is based on 75 percent of the 
amount indicated on the appraiser’s opinion of the prope rty’s fair monthly rental (proposed 
construction).
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 19 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-19Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
o.Temporary Boarder Rental Income Single Family Residence  
The verification of temporary boarder rental income requires the following:
·individual income  tax returns, signed and dated, plus all  applicable schedules for the 
previous 2 years, which show boarder income generated by the property, and
·the rental cannot impair the residential character of the property and  cannot exceed 25 
percent of the total floor area.
Analysis of Temporary  Boarder Rental Income
Include rental income in effective income only if the borrower has a reasonable likelihood of 
continued success due to the strength of the local market. Provide a justification on VA Form 
26-6393, Loan Analysis .
PITI reserves are not necessary to consider the income, and all the income may be used in th e 
analysis.
p.Alimony, Child Support, and Maintenance Payments  
Verify the income if the borrower wants it to be considered. The payments must be likely to 
continue for at least 3 years from the anticipated closing date to include them in effective 
income.
Factors used to determine whether the payments will continue include, but are not limited to:
·whether  the payments  are received  pursuant to a written  agreement  or court decree,
·the length of time  the payments have  been  received,
·the regularity  of receipt, and
·the availability  of procedures  to compel payment.
See “ECOA Considerations” in Topic 2, subsection d of this chapter.
q.Automobile or Similar Allowances  
Generally, automobile allowances are paid to cover specific expenses related to a borrowe r’s 
employment, and it is appropriate to use such income to offset a corresponding car payment. 
However, if the borrower reports an allowance as part of monthly qualifying income, it must 
be determined if the  automobile expense reported on IR S Form 2106 should be deducted 
from income or treated as a liability.
If the reported  expense  is less than the automobile  allowance,  the amount can be treated as 
income and added to borrower’s monthly income.
If the reported  expense  exceeds  the automobile  allowance,  the amount must  be deducted  from 
income  as a net calculation  in Section  D on VA  Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis .
Likewise, any  other  similar type of allowance  r eceived  by the borrower  should be considered 
with regards to the tax returns for determination of an offset of the corresponding obligation, 
as income, or as an expense.
Con
tinued on next page

--- PAGE 20 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-20Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
r.Other Types of Income  
While not all types of income can be listed, documentation of income must support the 
history of receipt and the likelihood or continuance of the income for at least 3 years from the 
anticipated closing date to include in effective income. Otherwise, consider whether it is 
reasonable to use the income to offsets short term obligations of 6 to 24 months duration.
“Oth er” types of income which may be considered as effective income include, but are not 
limited to:
·pension or other  retirement  benefits,
·disability  income,
·dividends from  stocks or other,
·interest  from  bonds, savings accounts, or others,
·royalties,
·notes rec eivable, and
·trusts 
VA disability income is considered a benefit and does not need to be documented for the 
likelihood of continuance. A COE will generally have the amount of VA disability income 
listed, however, see Topic 2, subsection m of this chapter for exceptions.
A VA award letter or bank statement may also verify the current monthly amount received.
The lender may include verified income from public assistance programs in effective income 
if evidence indicates it will likely continue for 3 years or  more.
The lender may include workers’ compensation income that will continue for at least 3 years 
from the anticipated closing date if the borrower chooses to reveal it.
The lender may include verified income received specifically for the care of any foster 
child(ren), only to balance the expenses of caring for the foster child(ren) against any 
increased residual requirements.
Example : The borrower(s) receive a stipend paid by the county or State for two foster 
children living in the residence. Instead of considering a family size of four, a family size of 
two should be used to determine the residual income requirement.
Do not include temporary income items such as VA educational allowances (including the 
Post 9/11 GI Bill benefit) and unemployment comp ensation in effective income.
Exception : If unemployment compensation is a regular part of a borrower’s income due to 
the nature of his/her employment (for example, seasonal work), it may be included.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 21 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-21Topic 2 : Income – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
r.Other Types of Income, continued  
A borrower in receipt of VA Pension or Disability benefits with Aid and Attendance should 
be discussed with the VA Pension Service, VA Compensation Service, or the VA Hospital 
where the property is located, to determine if the income is likely to continue for the 
foreseeable future.
If a borrower has a contract for employment in a foreign country (whether or not the 
employer is a US company or corporation), the income can be use d if it is verified, stable, 
and reliable. While some contracts are renewed yearly, consider the borrower’s past 
employment history and the likelihood of the contract being extended.
Income that is paid by a foreign employer or government in foreign currency should be 
converted to US dollars.

--- PAGE 22 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-22Topic 3: Income Taxes and Other Deductions
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.In
come Tax and Social Security Deductions  
Determine the appropriate deductions for Federal income tax and Social Security  using the 
“Employer’s Tax Guide”, Ci rcular  E,issued by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
Determine the appropriate deductions for state and local taxes using similar materials 
provided by the states.
The income tax should be based upon the borrower’s residence and what is documented in 
the guide to the IRS, and not solely the amount claimed on the paystub.
An active -duty servicemember’s LES may have a different state tax deduction than the state 
where the active -duty servicemember will be purchasing a residence or  refinancing. Select 
the state listed on the LES for the state taxes to be considered in state tax deductions.
The lender may consider the borrower’s potential tax benefits from obtaining the loan (for 
example, mortgage interest deduction) in the analysis. To do so:
·determine what the borrower’s withholding allowance will be, using the instructions 
and worksheet portion of IRS Form W-4, Employee’s Withholding Allowance 
Certificate, and
·apply that  withholding number when  calculating  Federal  and state income  tax 
deductions onVA Form 26 -6393, Loan Analysis , then
·document the change  in deductions in Item 47, Remarks, on VA F orm 26-6393 ,Loan 
Analysis .
b.Income Tax Credits from Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCC)  
MCCs issued by state and local governments may qualify a borrower for a Federal  tax credit. 
The Federal tax credit is based on a certain percentage of the borrower’s mortgage interest 
payment. Lenders must provide a copy of the MCC to VA with the loan package which 
indicates:
·documentation verifying any expenses charged by the local government entity for the 
program which is listed on the Closing Disclosure Statement, and 
the percentage to be used to calculate the tax credit, and if applicable, the amount of the 
indebtedness. The certified indebtedness can be comprised of a loan incurred by the borrower 
to acquire a principal residence or a qualified home improvement rehabilitation loan.
There is an IRS annual limit on the tax credit equal to the lesser of the borrower’s maximum 
tax liability or $2,000. Calculate the tax credit by appl ying the specified percentage to the 
interest paid on the certified indebtedness. Then apply the annual limit.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 23 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-23Topic 3 : Income Taxes and Other Deductions, continued
b.Income Tax Credits from Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCC) , continued  
Example:  The MCC shows a 30 percent rate and $100,000 certified indebtedness. The 
borrower will pay approximately $8,000 in annual mortgage interest. The borrower’s 
estimated total Federal income tax liability is $9,000. Calculate the tax credit as follows:
Table 2: MCC Calculation
Step Procedure
1 30 percent of $8,000 = $2,400
2 Apply the IRS annual $2,000 limit
3 The tax credit will be $2,000
This allows use of $167 (one twelfth of $2,000) as income to qualify the borrower.
If the mortgage on which the borrower pays interest is greater than the amount of certified 
indebtedness, limit the interest used in the tax credit calculation to that portion attributable to 
the certified indebtedness.
Since these programs are offered by state a nd local government(s), pre- approval by VA is 
not required for the borrower to participate in the program. The lender is responsible to 
determine all eligibility requirements are met by the borrower to participate in the program.
c.Other Deductions from Inc ome 
Include any costs for job-related expenses, child care, significant commuting costs, and any 
other direct or incidental costs associated with the borrower’s or spouse’s employment.
For children up to the age of 12 years, the lender is responsible for d etermining if there are 
any child care expenses for the borrower(s).

--- PAGE 24 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-24Topic 4: Assets and Closing Requirements
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Ass
ets and Amount of Cash Required for Closing  
Theborrower(s)  must  have  sufficient  cash assets  to cover:  
· any closing costs, pre-paids, or discount points which are the borrower’s responsibility  
and are not financed into  the loan, and
·the difference  between  the sales  price  and the loan amount, if  the sales price exceeds the 
reasonable value established by VA (i.e. negative equity).
VA does not require the borrower(s) to have additional cash to cover a certain number of 
mort
gage payments, unplanned expenses or other contingencies on the residence, or 
refinance of the Veteran’s residence.
However, the borrower’s ability to accumulate liquid assets and the current availability of 
liquid assets for unplanned expenses should be considered in the overall credit analysis.
Reserves are required for borrowers us ing rental income to qualify. See Topic 2, subsection n 
of this chapter for more information.
A rental offset does not require additional assets to cover PITI. See Topic 2, subsection n of 
this chapter for more information.
The assets securing a loan(s) ag ainst deposited funds (signature loans, cash value life 
insurance policies, 401(k) loans, other) may not be included as an asset  on the VA Form 26-
6393, Loan Analysis. See  Topic 5 of this chapter  for more information.
b.Verification of Assets and Cash to Close Requirements  
Verify all liquid assets owned by the borrower(s) to the extent they are needed to close the 
loan. In addition, verify any liquid assets that may have a bearing on the overall credit 
analysis (significant assets). Use VA Form 26-8497a, Request for Verification of Deposit , or 
electr onic, or certified copies of the borrower’s last two bank statements.
Verifications must be no more 120 days old (180 days for new construction).
For automatically closed loans, this means the date of the deposit verification is within 120 
days of the date  the note is signed (180 days for new construction).
For prior approval loans, this means the date of the deposit verification is within 120 days of 
the date the application is received by VA (180 days for new construction).
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 25 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-25Topic 4 : Assets and Closing Requirements, continued
c.Pending Sale of Real Estate  
In some cases,  the determination  that the income  and/or assets  of borrowers are needed to 
qualify for the loan depends upon the sale of presently the borrower’s owned real prop erty. 
Thesale proceeds  may be  necessary  to: 
· clear  the outstanding mortgage(s)  against  the property,
·pay outstanding consumer obligations,
·make  a downpayment or pay  closing costs  on the VA loan, and/or
·restore  previously used VA entitlement.
Evidence the sale  has been completed  should be included in the closing package to verify 
proceeds from the sale.
As an alternative, the Veteran may sell the property with the buyer assuming the outstanding 
mortgage obligation. See Chapter 6 of this handbook for assumptions (Release  of Liability) 
with a Substitution  of Entitlement  to restore previously used entitlement.
See Chapter  5 of this  handbook for  prior  approval  loans, which depend  upon the sale of 
property for the borrower to qualify.
See Chapter  5 of this handbook for  all required loan closing documents.
d.Gift Funds  
A gift can be provided by a donor that  does not have  any affiliation  with the builder, 
developer, real estate agent, or any other interested party to the transaction.  A gift letter must:  
·specify  the dollar  amount of the  gift,
·include the donor’s statement that no repayment is expected, and
·indicate  the donor’s name, address, telephone number, and relationship to the borrower.
The lender must verify that sufficient funds to cover the gift have been transferred to the 
borrower’s account, or will be documented as received by the closing agent at the time of 
closing.
Acceptable documentation includes the following:
·evidence of the borrower’s deposit,
·a copy of the donor’s funds by check/electronic transfer to the closing agent, or
·the CD showing receipt of the donor’s funds.

--- PAGE 26 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-26Topic 5: Debts and Obligations
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Ve
rifica tion Requirements for Debts and Obligations  
Alldebts and obligations of the borrowers’  must  be verified  and rated.  Obtain a credit report 
wi
th all information for all credit bureaus.  See Topic 7, subsection a of this chapter for details 
on the type of credit report required.  
For obligations not included on the credit report which are revealed on the application or 
through other means, the lender must obtain a verification of payment history  showing the 
obligation or other  written  verification  directly f rom the creditor, including the payment 
amount and outstanding balance.
The lender  must  also separately  verify  accounts listed  as “will  rate by mail only” or “need 
written authorization.”
When  a pay stub(s)  or LES indicates  an allotment,  the lender  must  investigate the nature of 
the allotment to determine whether the allotment is related to a debt or other obligation(s).  
Examples may include 401K obligation or repayment, child care, child support, or other.
For obligations that have not been rated on the credit report or elsewhere, obtain  the 
verification  and rating  directly  from  the creditor.  Include a written explanation for any 
obligation that is not rated.
Resolve all discrepancies prior to closing.  If the credit report, deposit verification,  bank  
statement,  or pay stub(s)  reveals  any debts or obligations which were not divulged by the 
borrowers):
·obtain clarification  as to the status  of such debts from  the borrower(s), then
·verify  any remaining  discrepancies with the creditor.
Credit reports and verifications  must  be no more  than 120 days old (180 days for new 
construction).
For automatically closed loans, this means the date of the credit report or verification  is 
within  120 days of the date the note is  signed (180 days for new construction).
For prior  approval loans, this means the date  of the credit  report  or verification is within 120 
days of the date the application is received by  VA (180 days for new construction).
ECOA  prohibits requests  for, or consideration of, credit  history and liability information  of a 
spouse who will not be contractually  obligated on the loan, except:
·if the borrower(s)  is relying on alimony, child  support, or maintenance payments from 
the spouse (or former spouse), or
·in community  property states.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 27 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-27Topic 5 : Debts and Obligations, continued
a.Verification Requirements for Debts and Obligations, continued 
If either  of these  situations  is applicable,  the lender  must:  
· Obtain  a credit  report  on the non-purchasing spouse in addition to the Veteran’s credit 
report.
·Consider the spouse’s credit history in reaching a determination. A Veteran  borrower  
with a satisfactory  credit  history may be considered a satisfactory risk even though the 
non-purchasing spouse’s credit may be unsatisfactory.
·Include the monthly payment of the non-purchasing spouse’s debts on the VA Form  26-
6393 ,Loan Analysis. For debts such as judgments and unpaid collection accounts, 
lenders should consider the Veteran’s capacity to address the debt(s).
·Develop the facts surrounding any unsatisfied judgments on the spouse’s credit report, 
such as where the judgment was filed and whether the parties were  married  to one 
another  at the time,  and secure a competent legal opinion whether the judgment may 
become a lien against the property.
·Exclude the monthly payment on the spouse’s debts from the loan analysis when  a 
reliable  source  of income for the spouse is verified  to reach such a conclusion which is 
voluntarily provided.
· Document VA Form 26 -6393 , Loan Analysis, with an explanation of facts and determination 
when concluding credit worthiness of the Veteran or excluding obligations of the non -
purchasing spouse .
b.Verification of Alimony and Child Support Obligations  
The payment amount of any alimony and/or child support obligation of the borrower must be 
verified.
Do not request documentation of a borrower’s divorce unless it is necessary to verify the 
amount of any alimony or child support liability indicated by the borrower. If, however, in 
the routine course of processing the loan, the lender encounters direct evidence (such as, in 
the credit report) that a child support or ali mony obligation exists, they should make any 
inquiries necessary to resolve discrepancies and obtain the appropriate verification.
Spousal support may be treated as a reduction in income on VA Form 26 -6393 , Loan 
Analysis.
Child support payment is treated as a liability on VA Form  26-6393 ,Loan Analysis.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 28 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-28Topic 5 : Debts and Obligations, continued
c. Analysis of Debts and Obligations  
Significant  debts and obligations include:
·debts and obligations with  a remaining  term of 10 months or more;  that is, long- term 
obligations, and
·accounts with  a term of less  than 10 months that  require  payments so large as to cause a 
severe impact on the family’s resources for any period of time.
Example : Monthly payments of $300 on an auto loan or lease with a remaining balance of 
$1,500, even though it should be paid out in 5 months, would be considered significant. The 
payment amount is so large as to cause a severe impact on the family’s resour ces during the 
first, most critical, months of the home loan.
Determine whether debts and obligations which do not fit the description of “significant” 
should be given any weight in the analysis. They may have an impact on the borrower’s 
ability to provide for family living expenses.
If a married Veteran wants to obtain the loan in his or her name only, the Veteran may do so 
without regard to the spouse’s debts and obligations in a non-community property state. 
However, in community property states, the spouse’s debts and obligations must be 
considered even if the Veteran wishes to obtain the loan in his or her name only. See Topic 2, 
subsection c of this chapter.
Debts assigned to an ex- spouse by a divorce decree will not generally be charged against a 
borrower. This includes debts that are now delinquent.
d.Borrower as Co -obligor/Co-Signor on a Loan or Obligation  
The borrower(s) may have a contingent liability based on co-signing a loan. The lender may 
exclude the loan payments from the monthly obligations fa ctored into the net effective 
income calculation in the loan analysis if:
·there  is evidence  that the loan payments are being made  by someone else and the 
obligation is current, and
·there is not a reason to believe that the borrower will have to participate in repayment 
of the loan.
e.Pending Sale of Real Estate  
A borrower(s) may have a current home and the sale of the real property is needed to 
complete the transaction. The lender may disregard the payments on the outstanding 
mortgage(s) and any consumer obligations which the Veteran intends to clear if available 
information provides a reasonable basis for concluding the equity to be realized from the sale 
will be sufficient for this purpose. See Topic 4, subsection c of this chapter for necessary 
documents.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 29 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-29Topic 5 : Debts and Obligations, continued
f. Secondary Borrowing  
If the borrower(s) plans to obtain a second mortgage simultaneously with the VA- guaranteed 
loan, include the second mortgage payment as a significant debt. From an underwriting 
standpoint, the Veteran must not be placed in a substantially worse position than if the entire 
amount borrowed had been guaranteed by VA. See Chapter 9 of this handbook for VA 
limitations on secondary borrowing.
If the borrower(s) provides written evidence that the student loan debt will be deferred at 
least 12 months beyond the date of closing, a monthly payment does not need to be 
considered.
If a student loan is in repayment, or  scheduled to begin within 12 months from the date of 
VA loan closing, the lender must consider the anticipated monthly obligation in the loan 
analysis and utilize the payment established by calculating each loan at a rate of five percent 
of the outstanding balance divided by 12 months.
Example:  A borrower has a $25,000 student loan balance and you multiple it by 5%, which 
equals $1,250. This amount ($1,250) is divided by 12 months to equal a monthly payment of 
$104.17.
If the payment(s) reported on the credit report for each student loan(s) is greater than the 
threshold payment calculation above in a above, the lender must  use the payment recorded 
on the credit report.
If the payment(s) reported on the credit report is less than the threshold payment calculation 
above
, in order to count the lower payment, the loan file must contain a statement from the 
student loan servicer that reflects the actual loan terms and payment information for each 
student loan(s).
The statement(s) must be dated within 60 days of VA loan closing, and may be an electronic 
copy from the student loan servicer’s website or a printed statement provided by the student 
loan servicer.
It is the lender’s discretion as to whether the credit report should be supplemented with this 
information.
g.Loans Secured by Deposited Funds  
Certain types of loans secured against deposited funds (signature loans, cash value life 
insurance  policies,  401(k) loans, or other)  in which repayment  may be obtained through 
extinguishing the asset, do not require repayment consideration for loan qualification.
The assets  required  to s ecure  a loan(s)  may not be included as an asset  on the VA Form 26 -
6393 ,Loan Analysis .
Use the current balance times 60 percent minus the loan balance to equal the usable amount 
to consider as an asset.
A statement would only be necessary to verify the amount used as an asset.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 30 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-30Topic 5 : Debts and Obligations, continued
h.Open 30 -Day Charge Accounts  
An open 30 -day charge account is defined as an account in which the borrower(s) must pay 
off the outstanding balance on the account every month.
For open 30- day charge accounts, determine if the borrower(s) pays the balance in full each 
month, and has verified funds to cover the account balance in addition to any funds required 
for closing costs.
·If there  are sufficient  funds, the payment does not need  to be included in Section D of 
the VA Form 26 -6393, Loan Analysis, but the obligation should continue to be listed.
·If there are not sufficient funds, a minimum payment of 5 percent of the ba lance should 
be considered included in Section D of the VAForm 26-6393, Loan Analysis.

--- PAGE 31 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-31Topic 6: Debts Owed to the Federal Government
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Ti
tle Search Requirements  
The lender is responsible for obtaining the necessary title search to ensure there are no 
encumbrances that would preclude the borrower from obtaining a loan.
b. VA Form 26- 8937, Verification of Benefits  
The lender is responsible for obtaining the necessary title search to ensure there  are no 
encumbrances  that would preclude  the borrower  from  obtaining a loan.
Generally, VA Form 26 -8937, Verification of VA Benefits, is not needed unless  the COE or 
new IRRRL  case number indicates  to submit  the form  to VA  before  closing. However, ask 
the Veteran  and any  Veteran  co-obligors (including spouse if a Veteran) if he or she:
·will be discharging within  the next 6 months from  the military  and has completed a 
PEB or MEB and will be filing for VA disability while still on active duty,
·has recently  filed for VA disability  and compensation, or VA  pension, and VA has not 
yet made a determination,
·would be entitled  to receive  VA disability  benefits,  but in receipt  of retirement pay,
·has received  VA disability  benefits in the past, or
·is a
n unmarried  surviving spouse of a Veteran  (has applied and/or in receipt of DIC 
who died on active duty or as a result of a
·service -connected disability.
If the Veteran  falls under one of the above  categories,  follow  the procedures discussed in 
Topic 2, subsection m of this chapter.
When  VA returns the form  to the lender  and the form indicates  that the borrower has any of 
the following:
·an outstanding indebtedness of VA overpaid education, compensation, or pension 
benefits,
·an education or direct  home loan in default,
·an outstanding indebtedness resultin g from  payment of a claim  on a prior VA home 
loan, or
·a repayment plan for any of these debts that is current,
Then  one of the following must accompany the loan  package:
·evidence  of payment in full  of the debt, or
·evidence  of a current  payment  plan acceptable  to VA and evidence  that the Veteran 
executed a promissory note for the entire debt balance.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 32 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-32Topic 6 : Debts Owed to the Federal Government, continued
b. VA Form 26- 8937, Verification of Benefits, continued 
VAmay find a repayment  plan acceptable  if: 
· the Veteran  has been satisfactorily  making payments on a repayment plan in effect prior 
to the lender’s inquiry,
·the Veteran’s  overall  credit  history and anticipated  financial  capacity after the proposed 
loan is made indicate a reasonable likelihood that the repayment plan will be honored 
and the outstanding amount of indebtedness is not so large that it would prevent 
payment in full, within a reasonable period (approximately 1 year), or
·the case involves unusually meritorious  circumstances.
Examples
Consideration would be given to a Veteran  with an outstanding/excellent credit history and 
adequate income whose  debt balance  is too large to be reasonably paid out in less than 18 
months to 2 years.
VA will offer  special  consideration  to a Veteran’s  claim  that he or she was not previously 
aware of an overpayment of benefits.
c.What is the Credit Alert Verification Reporting System (CAIVRS)  
CAIVRS is a Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) maintained computer 
information system which enables participating lenders to  learn  when a borrower  has 
previously defaulted  on a federally -assisted  loan. More information can be found at: 
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/sfh/caivrs
The database includes default information from the Department of Agriculture, Department 
of Education, Department of Justice, HUD, Small Business Administration, Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, and VA.
The VA default information included in the database relates to:
·overpayments on education cases,
·overpayments on disability benefits income, and
·claims paid due to home loan foreclosures which resulted in a debt of the government 
(Generally type 2 VA loans).
CAIVRS Procedures
A CAIVRS  inquiry must  be performed  for all borrowers  and co-borrowers (Veteran or non -
Veteran) on all VA loans, including IRRRLs. The one exception to this policy is that 
CAIVRS  is not  required  for non-purchasing spouses in community property states.
VA assigns a 10-digit VA lender identification number (ID) to each new lender, then 
automatically  forwards  the ID number to HUD  with a request  to grant the lender CAIVRS 
access.  The lender can begin accessing CAIVRS usually between 7 to 10 business days after 
receiving its VA ID number assignment.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 33 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-33Topic 6 : Debts Owed to the Federal Government, continued
c.What is the Credit Alert Verification Reporting System (CAIVRS), continued 
Toregister  for CAIVRS  access for  first time users,  please  use the following link: 
https://entp.hud.gov/idapp/html/f57register.cfm.
Please  direct  questions concerning problems encountered  with accessing CAIVRS to 
caivrs_admin@hud.gov.
If the borrower(s)  is found to have  a delinquent federal  debt through CAIVRS, the  validity  
and delinquency status  of the debt should be verified  by contacting the creditor agency  using 
the contact phone number and case number reflected on the borrower’s CAIVRS report.
The creditor agency that is owed the debt can verify that the debt has been resolved. 
Documentation should be included in the loan file and an explanation must  be pro vided on
VA Form  26-6393 , Loan Analysis . It is not necessary  for CAIVRS to update the number if 
documentation is included in the loan file.
Once screening is complete, enter the CAIVRS confirmation code on VAForm 26 -6393,
Loan Analysis , in the space  to the right  of the “no” block in item 46 for purchase and 
refinances.
For IRRRLs,  enter  the code  onVA Form  26-8923, IRRRL Worksheet, in the Notes section.
d.Borrower with Presently Delinquent Federal Debts  
When  CAIVRS  or another  source  indicates  that the borrower  has a delinquent Federal debt, 
the following steps must be taken:
·Suspend processing of the  loan application  to determine  the reason for the non “A” 
number.
·Give full consideration to the CAIVRS information, and any subsequent clarifying 
information or documentation provided, in applying VA credit standards.  Any non “A” 
number received does not automatically disqualify a Veteran from using their home 
loan benefit; however,  the lender  must  document and justify  the approval. See Topic 7, 
subsection b of this chapter for documentation and explanation requirements.
·If a previ ous VA loan is involved that resulted in a debt to the government (due to 
foreclosures,  short sale, deed  in lieu, or other), the borrower  may contact  the VA Debt 
Management  Center  at 1-800-827- 0648 or at dmc.ops@va.gov to make arrangements 
to repay the debt.
Generally,  only type 2 VA loans (fifth  digit of the VA loan number)  result in  a debt to VA 
and are reported.  The Veteran’s entitlement cannot be restored until the debt to VA is paid in 
full.
If the fifth digit of the previous loan number is a type 6 VA loan, there is generally a loss to 
the government and the loss is not reported to CAVIRS. A loss to VA does not need to be 
repaid; however, the Veteran’s previously used entitlement to guaranty the previous VA loan 
is not restored until the loss is paid in full.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 34 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-34Topic 6 : Debts Owed to the Federal Government, continued
d.Borrower with Presently Delinquent Federal Debts, continued 
Each agency has their timeliness requirements before removing a non “A” CAVIRS finding. 
This does not preclude the Veteran or borrower from receiving a VA loan if credit standards 
are met for VA l oans. See Topic 4.07b (13 and 14) of this Chapter for guidelines after a 
bankruptcy or foreclosure.
Example : A borrower suffered a loss on a FHA loan home loan 2 years ago. While HUD has 
not removed the CAIVRS finding as the 3-year waiting period has not p assed for FHA, the 
lender is eligible to continue processing a VA loan without an “A” CAIVRS finding due to 
the borrower(s) meeting VA credit guidelines for foreclosures and documented in the loan 
file.
CAIVRS information is only for the lender’s and borro wer’s use in processing the loan 
application. Only those persons having responsibility for screening borrowers and/or co-
borrowers may use CAIVRS. Any other use is unauthorized.
e.Treatment of Federal Debts  
A borrower(s) cannot be considered a satisfactory credit risk if he or she is presently 
delinquent or in default on any debt to the Federal Government until the delinquent account 
has been brought current or satisfactory arrangement have been made between the borrower 
and the Federal agency.
Example : A borrower has delinquent taxes and payments have not been made for several 
years. The establishment of a payment plan after the CAVIRS finding has been addressed 
may not be sufficient to show a satisfactory payment arrangement to repay the obliga tion.
A borrower(s) cannot be considered a satisfactory credit risk if he or she has a judgment lien 
against his or her property for a debt owed to the Government until the judgment is paid or 
otherwise satisfied.

--- PAGE 35 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-35Topic 7: Credit History – Required Docum entation and Analysis
Change Date : July 27, 2023
·Subsection b has been updated to include guidance regarding medical collections and 
medical charge offs . 
·Subsection b has been updated to provide clarity regarding the monthly payment 
consideration for unpaid medical collection accounts.
a.Credit Report Standards  
Credit  Reports used in analyzing VA  loans must  be either  Three -file Merged Credit Reports 
(MCR), or Residential Mortgage Credit Reports (RMCR).
The credit report must be less tha n 120 -days old (180 days for new construction). For 
automatically closed loans and prior approval loans, the date  of the credit  report  must  be 
within  120 days of the date the note is  signed (180 days for new construction).
If an RMCR  is used, the standards applicable  to a RMCR  include, but are not limited to, the 
following:
·The report must be  prepared by a reputable  credit  reporting agency.
·Each  account with  a balance  must  have  been checked  with the creditor within 90 days 
of the date of the credit  report.
For each debt listed,  the report must  provide the creditor’s name,  date the account was  
opened,  high credit,  current  status,  required  payment, unpaid balance, and payment history.
The report must name at least two national repositories of credit records contacted  for each 
location  in which the borrower  has resided  during the most recent  2 years  (separate  
repository inquiries  are required for  any co -borrowers with individual credit records).
The report must include all available public recor ds information that is not considered 
obsolete under the Fair Credit  Reporting Act(15 U.S.C. §  1681) such as bankruptcies, 
judgments, law suits, foreclosures and tax liens.
The RMCR  must  be an original  or electronic  report,  with no erasures, whiteouts, or 
alterations.
The report  must contain  a 24- mont h employment  and residency  history.
VA may decline  to accept  a credit  report which does not meet  these  standards.
If possible, the cost of the credit  report must  be listed  on the credit  report. If not possible, an 
itemized invoice identifying the borrower(s) is required to verify  the cost on the Closing 
Disclosure  Statement  (CD)  when  charging the borrower for the credit report.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 36 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-36Topic 7 : Credit History – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
b. How to Analyze Credit  
The borrower’s past repayment practices on obligations is the best indicator of his or her 
willingness to repay future obligations. Emphasis should be on the borrower’s overall 
payment patterns rather than isolated occurrences of unsatisfactory repayment. Determine 
whether the borrower (and spouse, if applicable) is a satisfactory credit risk based on a 
careful analysis of the credit report and other credit data.
VA does not have a minimum credit score requirement.
Rent and Mortgage Payment History
The borrower’s most recent 24 -month rental history and any outstanding, assumed, or 
recently retired mortgages must be verified and rated. Housing expense payment history is 
often a primary indicator of how motivated the borrower is to make timely mortgage 
payments in the future.
Absence of Credit History
For borrower(s) with no established credit history, base the determination on the borrower’s 
payment record on alternative or nontraditional credit directly from the borrower or creditor 
in which a payment history can be verified.
Absence of a credit history is not generally considered an adverse factor.
It may result when:
·borrower(s)  has not yet  developed a credit  history,
·borrower(s)  has routinely used cash rather  than credit,  and/or
·borrower(s)  has not used since  some disruptive credit  event  such as bankruptcy or debt 
pro-ration through consumer credit counseling.
Accounts in the Spouse’s Name
See Topic 2, subsection c in this chapter for ECOA and consideration of the spouse’s credit 
history.
Adverse Credit Data
In circumstances not involving bankruptcy, satisfactory credit is generally considered to be 
re-established after the borrower(s), have made satisfactory payments for 12 months after the 
date the last derogatory credit item was satisfie d. If a credit report reveals numerous unpaid 
collections and/or accounts that are not being paid timely, including some which have been 
outstanding for many years, then once the borrower has satisfied the obligations, and then 
makes timely payments on subsequent obligations for at least 12 months, satisfactory credit 
is considered re -established.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 37 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-37Topic 7 : Credit History – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
b.How to Analyze Credit, continued 
Medical Collection and Charge -off Accounts
Identifiable medical collections are collection accounts that are established when an overdue 
medical bill is referred to a collection agency. Charge -offs may occur when a creditor is no 
longer pursuing repayment of the medical debt. Le nders may disregard all identifiable 
medical collections, including charge-off accounts, that have not been reduced to a judgment 
or lien. 
Identifiable medical collection accounts that have not been reduced to a judgment or lien do 
not have to be paid off as a condition for loan approval and should not impact the overall 
acceptability of a borrower's credit.
Lenders do not need to obtain explanations for medical collections or charge-offs and do not 
need to otherwise address such accounts.
Non- medical Coll ection Accounts 
Isolated non-medical collection accounts do not necessarily have to be paid off as a condition 
for loan approval. A credit report may show numerous satisfactory accounts and one or two 
unpaid collections. In such instances, while it would be preferable to have collections paid, it 
would not necessarily be a requirement for loan approval. 
However, non- medical collection accounts must be considered part of the borrower’s overall 
credit history and such accounts should be considered open, recent credit. These unpaid 
accounts must therefore be considered in the debt-to- income ratio and residual income 
calculation on VA Form 26 -6393, Loan Analysis, and when using an Automated 
Underwriting System (AUS). If such accounts are listed on the credit report with a minimum 
payment, then the debt should be recognized at the minimum payment amount. 
Non-medical collection accounts without established payment arrangements are to be 
included with a calculated monthly payment using 5% of the outstanding bala nce of the 
collection. Borrowers with a history of such accounts should have re- established satisfactory 
credit in order to be considered a satisfactory credit risk. 
While VA does not require such accounts be paid- off prior to closing if the borrower’s 
overall credit is acceptable, an underwriter must address the existence of the account(s) with 
an explanation on VA Form 26- 6393, Loan Analysis, and justify why positive factors 
outweigh the negative credit history such accounts represent.
Charge  -off Accou nts
These accounts are typically collections in which the creditor is no longer pursuing collection 
of the account. The underwriter must address the circumstances  regarding  the negative  credit  
history when  reviewing the overall credit of the borrower(s). This does not apply to 
identifiable medical charge -offs, as described above.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 38 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-38Topic 7 : Credit History – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
b.How to Analyze Credit, continued 
Disputed  Accounts
Lenders may consider a Veteran's claim of bona fide or legal defenses regarding  unpaid debts 
except  when the debt has been  reduced to judgment.
The underwriter  should document the reason(s)  for not considering an  account on VA Form 
26-6393, Loan Analysis .
Judgments
Account balances  reduced  to judgment by a court  must  either  be paid in full or subject to a 
repayment plan with a history of timely payments.
A history of timely  payments would be generally  considered  as making 12 payments to 
reestablish credit.
However, in certain cases when a judgment has only been in place for a few months, an 
underwriter could justify on VA Form 26-6393 , Loan Analysis , a shorter repayment history if 
the documentation indicates the borrower immediately  addressed  the judgment  after it was 
filed and began a repayment plan.
Payoff of Unpaid or Untimely Debts
For unpaid or debts that have not been paid timely, pay- off of these debts after the 
acceptability of a borrower's credit is questioned does not alter the unsatisfactory record of 
payment. A period of making timely payments on subsequent obligations for at least 12 
months, then satisfactory credit is considered re -established.
Consumer Credit Counseling Plan
If a borrower(s) has prior adverse credit and are participating in a Consumer Cred it 
Counseling plan, they may be determined to be a satisfactory credit risk if they demonstrate 
12 months’ satisfactory payments and the counseling agency approves the new credit. If a 
borrower(s) has good prior credit and are participating in a Consumer C redit Counseling 
plan, such participation is to be considered a neutral factor, or even a positive factor, in 
determining creditworthiness. Do not treat this as a negative credit item if the borrower 
entered the Consumer Credit Counseling plan before reaching the point of having bad credit.
Bankruptcy
The fact that a bankruptcy exists in a borrower (or spouse’s) credit history does not in itself 
disqualify the loan. Develop complete  information  on the facts and circumstances of the 
bankruptcy. Consider the reasons for the bankruptcy and the type of bankruptcy filing.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 39 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-39Topic 7 : Credit History – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
b.How to Analyze Credit, continued 
Bankruptcy Filed Under the Straight Liquidation and Discharge Provisions of the 
Bankruptcy Law (Petition under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code):
·If the bankruptcy was discharged  more  than 2 years  ago from  the date of closing for 
purchases and refinances, it may be disregarded.
·If the bankruptcy was discharged within the last 1 to 2 years, it is probably not possible 
to determine that the borrower or spouse is a satisfactory  credit  risk unless  both of the 
following requirements  are met:
Table 3: Requirements for Bankruptcies Discharged within the last 1 to 2 years
Requirement Explanation
1 The borrower(s) had obtained consumer items on credit subsequent to  the 
bankruptcy and has satisfactorily made the payments over a continued 
period.
2 The bankruptcy was caused by circumstances beyond the control of the 
borrower or spouse such as unemployment, prolonged strikes, medical 
bills not covered by insurance, an d so on, and the circumstances  are 
verified. Divorce is not generally viewed as beyond the control of the 
borrower and/or spouse .
If the bankruptcy was discharged within the past 12 months, it will generally not be possible 
to determine that the borrower(s) is a satisfactory credit risk.
If the bankruptcy was caused by failure of the business of a self -employed borrower, it may 
be possible to determine that the borrower is a satisfactory credit risk if all four of the 
following are met:
Table 4: Requirements for Bankruptcies Caused by the Failure of a Self -Employed 
Borrower’s Business
Requirement Explanation
1 The borrower obtained a permanent position after the business failed.
2 There is not any derogatory credit information prior to the self -
employment.
3 There is not any derogatory credit information subsequent to the 
bankruptcy.
4 Failure of the business was not due to the borrower’s misconduct.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 40 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-40Topic 7 : Credit History – Required Documentation and Analysis, continued
b.How to Analyze Credit, continued 
Bankruptcy Petition Under Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Code
This type of filing indicates an effort to pay creditors. Regular payments are made to a court -
appointed trustee over a 2 to 3 -year period or, in some cas es, up to 5 years, to pay off scaled 
down or entire debts.
If the borrower(s) has finished making all payments satisfactorily, the lender may conclude that 
the borrower has re -established satisfactory credit.
If the borrowers) has satisfactorily made at le ast 12 months’ worth of the payments and the 
Trustee or the Bankruptcy Judge approves of the new credit, the lender may give favorable 
consideration .
Foreclosures
The fact that a home loan foreclosure (or deed -in-lieu or short sale in lieu of foreclosure) exists 
in a borrower(s) history does not in itself disqualify the loan. Develop complete information on 
the facts and circumstances of the foreclosure.
You may disregard a foreclosure finalized more than 2 years from the date of closing. If th e 
foreclosure was finalized within the last 1 to 2 years from the date of closing, it is probably not 
possible to determine that the borrower(s) is a satisfactory credit risk unless both of the 
following requirements are met:
The borrower (s) has obtained consumer items on credit subsequent to the foreclosure and has 
satisfactorily made the payments over a continued period, and
The foreclosure was caused by circumstances beyond the control of the borrower (s) such as 
unemployment; prolonged strikes, medical  bills not covered by insurance, and so on, and the 
circumstances are verified.
If a foreclosure, deed in lieu, or short sale process is in conjunction with a bankruptcy, use the 
latest date of either the discharge of the bankruptcy or transfer of title fo r the home to establish 
the beginning date of re -established credit. If there is a significant delay in the transfer of title, 
the lender should contact the RLC of jurisdiction for guidance.
Deed  in lieu or short  sale
For a deed in lieu or short sale, deve lop complete information on the facts and circumstances 
in which the borrowers)  voluntarily surrendered  the property. If the borrower’s payment 
history on the property was not affected before the short sale or deed in lieu and was 
voluntarily communicating with the servicer or holder, then a waiting period from the date 
transfer of the property  may not be necessary.
If the foreclosure, deed and lieu or short sale was on a VA -guaranteed loan, then a borrower  
may not have  full entitlement  available  for the new VA loan. Ensure that the borrower’s COE 
reflects sufficient entitlement to meet any secondary marketing requirements of the lender.

--- PAGE 41 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-41Topic 8: Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS)
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Gener
al AUS Information  
VA has approved Freddie Mac’s Loan Prospector, Fannie Mae’s Desktop Underwriter, and 
VA approved proprietary lender AUS systems to use in connection with VA- guaranteed 
home loans. These systems incorporate VA’s credit standards and processing requirements.
Lenders may use certain reduced documentation requirements on cases processed with 
approved AUS. The level of reduced documentation depends on the risk classification 
assig ned. The systems use different terminology such as Approve or Accept. The tables in 
this section give a general description of documentation waivers. Please note that the 
documentation requirements are the same for these cases as for non -AUS cases, except for 
any differences cited in the tables.
The automated systems do not approve or disapprove loans. They merely determine a risk 
classification. It is still the lenders underwriter’s decision whether or not to approve the loan.
Although VA has approved the use of these systems, we are not the vendor. The terms and 
conditions of use must be negotiated directly with the provider of these systems.
It is imperative that the data entered into the automated underwriting system be accurately 
verified. The data util ized by the system must be supported by source documentation 
obtained by the lender. Inaccurate or unverified data will result in invalidation of the risk 
classification. Under certain circumstances, it could also result in a finding of material 
misreprese ntation, which could affect the validity of the guaranty.
b.Underwriter’s Certification  
Because the AUS will be making the determination that the loan satisfies credit and income 
requirements, cases receiving an “Accept” or “Approve” rating will not require the 
underwriter’s signature on VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis (items 49 through 53). 
However, the file must still contain the Lender’s Certification referenced in  Chapter 5 of the 
VA Lender
’s Handbook.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 42 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-42Topic 8 : Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS), continued
c.Documentation Guidelines for Credit History  
Refer to the following table for documentation guidelines for credit history:
Table 5: Documentation Guidelines for Credit History
Subject and 
ReferenceDocumentation Guidelines 
and Reductions for ReferDocumentation Reductions 
for Accept/Approve
Types of credit 
reports used in 
reconciliation (Topic 
7 of this chapter)Use any of the following if 
≤120 or 180 -days old 
(existing/new  constructions):
All in -file reports, Selected in -
file reports,  Merged  credit 
report, or RMCRSame  as Refer.
Explanation of 
discrepancies in 
reported debt (Topic 
5 of this chapter)No explanation is required. Same  as Refer.
Rental payment 
history (Topic  7 of 
this chapter)Provide a 24 month rental 
history directly from the 
landlord, through information 
shown on credit report or by  
cancelled checksNo verification of rent is 
required.
Verification of 
significant non- 
mortgage debt (Topic  
5 of this chapter)Obtain direct verification for 
significant debts not reported on 
the credit report.
Note:  Significant means that 
the debt has a monthly payment 
exceeding 2 percent of the 
stable monthly income for all 
borrowers.Same as Refer.
Note : Perform manual 
downgrade to Refer if direct 
verification reveals more than 1 
by 30 day late payment in the 
past 12 months for any of the 
omitted debts.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 43 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-43Topic 8: Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS), continued
c.Documentation Guidelines for Credit History , continued  
Table 5: Documentation Guidelines for Credit History , continued
Subject and 
ReferenceDocumentation Guidelines 
and Reductions for ReferDocumentation Reductions 
for Accept/Approve
Mortgage payment 
history (Topic 7 of 
this chapter)Obtain  direct  verification  when 
ratings are not available on 
mortgages that are any of the 
following:
·Outstanding,
·Assumed,  or
·Recently  retired .
A written explanation of 
mortgage payment history is 
required for bor rowers with 
more than 1 by 30 day late 
payment for all mortgages for 
the past 12 months.Perform manual downgrade to 
Refer for any mortgage debt 
with more than 1 by 30 day late 
payment in the past 12 months.
Account balances 
(Topic 7 of this 
chapter)If a mortgage or other 
significant debt is listed on the 
credit report as past due and 
was last updated ≥90 days, 
verify current status of past due 
debt.Same as Refer, however if 
rating is currently ≥90 days  past 
due, manually downgrade to 
Refer.
Derogatory credit 
information (Topic 7 
of this chapter)Obtain explanation for 
derogatory credit. Explain 
assessment of creditworthiness 
on VA Form 26 -6393 , Loan  
AnalysisNo determination of 
creditworthiness is required.
Alimony and/or child 
support payments 
(Topic 2 of this 
chapter)Provide  the following:
·Proof  of deposits  on bank 
statements for 3 months, 
and
·Front  page  and details  of 
support payments from the  
divorce decree, indicating 
evidence of at least  3 years  
continuance.Same as Refer.
Continued on  next page

--- PAGE 44 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-44Topic 8: Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS), continued
d.Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) Not Self -Employed  
Refer to the following table for documentation guidelines for employment/income for 
borrower(s) who are not self-employed:
Table 6: Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) Not Self -Employed
Subject and 
ReferenceDocumentation Guidelines 
and Reductions for ReferDocumentation Reductions 
for Accept/Approve
Employment gaps 
(Topic 2 of this 
chapter)No explanation for employment 
gaps is required if the gaps are 
˂30 days.No explanation for employment 
gaps is required if gaps are ˂60 
days.
Verif ying current 
employment for 
borrowers who are not 
self-employed (Topic 
2 of this chapter)Document telephone contact 
verifying borrower’s current 
employer.
Use pay  stubs covering at least 
1 full month of employment 
and contains the following:
·Year -to-Date (YTD) 
information,
·Bonus information, and
·Overtime information.Same as Refer. 
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 45 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-45Topic 8: Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS), continued
d.Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) Not Self -Employed, continued  
Table 6: Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) Not Self -Employed, continued
Subject and 
ReferenceDocumentation Guidelines 
and Reductions for ReferDocumentation Reductions 
for Accept/Approve
Verifying previous 
employment (Topic 2 
of this chapter)Use a VOE or any of the 
following, covering the 2 -year 
period prior to closing:
·W-2 Forms,  or
·Income  information 
obtained from the IRS via 
one of the following 
forms:
□Form 8821, Tax 
Information 
Authorization,  (or 
alternate form 
acceptable to the 
IRS that collects 
comparable 
information) or
□Form 4506, Request 
for Copy of  Tax 
Return,  (or alternate 
form acceptable to 
the IRS that collects 
comparable 
inform ation).
·No VOE or W -2 Forms  are 
required for a borrower on 
active duty.
·The Leave and Earning 
Statement (LES) should be 
used.No VOE is required if the 
borrower has been with the 
same employer for 1 year and 
W-2 Forms for 1 previous year 
have been collecte d.
No W -2 Forms are required for 
a borrower on active duty.
No W -2 Forms are required if 
all of the following are met:
·Borrower  is with the 
same employer >2 years
·Employer  phone  contact 
verifies the length of 
employment  and current 
status (still employed)
·Borrower is not self - 
employed  or 
commissioned
·Bonus, overtime, or 
secondary  income  is not 
needed to qualify
·Stable monthly  income is 
to be determined by using 
current  base pay only 
(rather than total 
earnings)
·Borrower signs one of the 
following  for the 
previous  2 tax years:
□Form  8821,  and
□Form 4506.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 46 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-46Topic 8: Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS), continued
e.Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) Self -Employed  
Refer  to the following table  for documentation guidelines for employment/income for 
borrower(
s) who are self-employed:
Table 7: Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) who are Self -Employed
Subject and 
ReferenceDocumentation Guidelines 
and Reductions for ReferDocumentation Reductions 
for Accept/Approve
Individual tax returns 
for self - employed 
borrowers (Topic 2 of 
this chapter)Provide one of the following, 
with all line items captured:
·signed copies of individual  
tax returns for the most 
recent 2- year period or ta x 
transcripts, or
·individual income 
information  obtained from  
the IRS via one of the 
following forms:
□Form 8821 (or an 
alternate form 
acceptable to the 
IRS that collects 
comparable 
information)  or
□Form 4506 (or an 
alternate form 
acceptable to the 
IRS that collects 
comparable 
information).Same as Refer.
Balance sheets and 
profit and loss 
statements for self - 
employed borrowers 
(Topic 2 of this 
chapter) .No balance sheet or YTD Profit  
and Loss  (YTD  P&L)  is 
required if origination date is
< 7 months  from  the business ’ 
fiscal year end (for which tax 
returns or information from the 
IRS via Form 8821 or Form 
4506 were provided).No balance sheet or YTD P&L 
is required.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 47 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-47Topic 8: Automated Underwriting Cases (AUS), continued
e.Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) Self -Employed, continued  
Table 7: Documentation Guidelines for Borrower(s) who are Self -Employed , continued
Subject and 
ReferenceDocumentation Guidelines 
and Reductions for ReferDocumentation Reductions 
for Accept/Approve
Business tax returns 
for self -employed 
borrowers (Topic 2 of 
this chapter)Provide  one of the following, 
with all line items captured:
·Signed  copies  of business 
tax returns for the most 
recent 2 -year period.
·Business income 
information  obtained  from 
the IRS via one of the 
following forms:
□Form 8821 (or an 
alternate form 
acceptable to the 
IRS that collects 
comparable 
information) or
□Form  4506  (or an 
alternate form 
acceptable to the 
IRS that collects 
comparable 
information).No business tax returns are 
required if all of the following 
conditions are met:
·Borrower proves 
ownership of the business 
for at least the past 5 years.
·Individual tax returns 
reflect consistent income  
for the past 2 years.
·Funds for downpayment or 
closing costs are not from 
the business.
Verify assets to close 
in the borrower’s 
name (Topic 4 of this  
chapter)Provide bank/asset statements 
covering the most recent 2 - 
month period in lieu of a 
Verification of Deposit (VOD).Provide bank/asset statements 
covering most recent 1 - month 
period in  lieu of a VOD.

--- PAGE 48 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-48Topic 9: How to Complete VA Form 26 -6393 Loan Analysis
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Gener
al 
In order to properly enter information on VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis , the underw riter 
must understand and apply the guidelines provided in the preceding sections of this chapter.
b.Estimated Monthly Shelter Expense  
Special instructions are listed in the following table:
Table 8: Estimated Monthly Shelter Expenses
Item Special Instructions
16 If taxes are expected to increase, use the increased amount.
17 Include the flood insurance premium for properties located in special flood hazard areas.
18 If special assessments are anticipated, use the anticipated amount.
19 Calculate maintenance and utility costs using 14¢ per square foot for the gross living 
area as per the appra isal.
Example : A 1,500 square foot home with a 1,500 square foot unfished basement would 
have a combined maintenance and  utility cost of $210 (1,500sq X .14).
20 For condominiums or houses in a Planned Unit Development (PUD), include the 
monthly amount of  maintenance assessment payable to the homeowner’s association.
c.Debts and Obligations  
List all known  debts and obligations of the borrower  and spouse including any alimony 
and/or child support payments. Spousal support or alimony may be treated as a reduction in 
income; however, child support is to be treated as a liability.
Place a check mark in the (3) column next to any “significant” debt or obligation. See the 
topic  “Analysis of Debts and Obligations”  in Topic 4.05c of this chapter, for an explanation 
of “significant.”
Job Related Expense –  Section D line 29.
Include any costs for child care, significant commuting costs, and any other direct or 
incidental costs associated with the borrower’s (or spouse ’s) employment. Check this item if 
total job -related expenses are significant.
Up to age 12, the lender  is responsible for determining if there  are any child care expenses for 
the borrower(s).
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 49 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-49Topic 9 : How to Complete VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis, continued
d.Federal Income Tax – Item 32 
Enter  the 
borrower’s  estimated  monthly Federal  income  tax, based  upon  IRS tax tables. If the 
borrower has a MCC, reduce the Federal income tax by the estimated tax cred it. See Topic 3, 
subsection b of this chapter for MCC.
e. Balance Available for Family Support –  Item 43 
Enter the appropriate residual income amount from the following tables in the “guideline” 
box. Residual income is the amount of net income remaining (after deduction of debts and 
obligations and monthly shelter expenses) to cover family living expenses.
The numbers are based on data supplied in the Consumer Expenditures Survey (CES) 
published by the Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics.
They vary according to loan size, family size, and region of the country.
Residual Tables . A key to the geographic regions is listed in the following tables:
Table 9: Table of Residual Incomes by Region for Loan Amounts of $79,999 and Below
Family Size Northeas t Midwest South West
1 $390 $382 $382 $425
2 $654 $641 $641 $713
3 $788 $772 $772 $859
4 $888 $868 $868 $967
5 $921 $902 $902 $1,004
For Family Size Over 5: Add $75 for each additional member up to a family of seven.
Table 10: Table of Residual Incomes by Region for Loan Amounts of $80,000 and Above
Family Size Northeast Midwest South West
1 $450 $441 $441 $491
2 $755 $738 $738 $823
3 $909 $889 $889 $990
4 $1,025 $1,003 $1,003 $1,117
5 $1,062 $1,039 $1,039 $1,158
For Family Size Over 5: Add $80 for each additional member up to a family of seven.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 50 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-50Topic 9 : How to Complete VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis, continued
e. Balance Available for Family Support –  Item 43, continued  
Table 11: Key to Geographic Regions Used on the Preceding Tables (Tables 6 and 7)
Geographic Region States
Northeast Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, 
New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island
Midwest Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Kansas , Michigan , Minnesota , Missouri , 
Nebraska , North Dakota , Ohio , South Dakota , Wisconsin
South Alabama , Arkansas , Delaware , District of Columbia , Florida , 
Georgia , Kentucky , Louisiana , Maryland , Mississippi , North 
Carolina , Oklahoma , Puerto Rico , South Carolina , Tennessee , 
Texas , Virginia , West Virginia
West Alaska , Arizona , California , Colorado , Hawaii , Idaho , Montana , 
Nevada , New Mexico , Oregon , Utah , Washington , Wyoming
Examples
A Veteran  has a family  size of 3 purchasing a home in Arizona  with a loan amount of 
$400,000.  The residual figure will be $990.
A Veteran has a family size of 8 purchasing a home in Georgia with a loan amount of 
$150,000.  The residual figure will be $1,199 (family size of 5 which is $1,039 adding $80  
for each additional  family  member  up to a family size of 7).  The eighth person will not be 
considered in the calculation.
Special  Instructions
Count all members of the household (without  regard  to the nature  of the relationship) when 
determining “family size,” including:
·A borrower’s  spouse who is  not joining in title or  on the note, and
·Any other  individuals who depend on the borrower for support.
If a dependent is  claimed  on the Federal Tax Returns, then the dependent must be considered 
as a member of the household, to calculate residual income.
Examples
·Children from  a spouse’s prior  marriage  who are not the borrower’s legal dependents.
·A dependent parent.
Continued on  next page

--- PAGE 51 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-51Topic 9 : How to Complete VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis, continued
e. Balance Available for Family Support –  Item 43, continued  
Exceptions  for Considering  All Members  of the Household
The lender may omit any individuals from “family size” who are fully supported from  a 
source  of verified  income  which, for whatever  reason, is not included in effective income in 
the loan analysis.
Examples
·a spouse not obligated on the title or on the note that  has stable  and reliable income 
sufficient to support his or her living expenses.
·a child  for whom sufficient  foster  care payments or child  support is received regularly, or
·a parent  who has  sufficient  stable  and reliable  non-taxable  income.
Reducing  the Residual  Income  Figures
Reduce  the residual income figure  (from the  above  tables)  by five percent if:
·the borrower(s)  is an active  duty or retired  serviceperson, or
·there  is a clear  indication  that a borrower  will receive  the benefits resulting from use of 
milit
ary-based facilities located near the property.  Examples include Guard and Reserve 
military retirees, 100 percent disabled Veterans and their family members, or Medal of 
Honor recipients.
f.Debt -to-Income Ratio – Item 44 
VA
’s debt-to- income ratio is a ratio of total monthly debt payments (housing expense, 
installment debts, and other debt) to gross monthly income. The following steps are required 
to determine the debt -to-income ratio:
Table 12: Steps to Determine the Debt -to-Income Ratio
Step Description
1 Add: Items 15+16+17+18+20+40 = Debt
2 Add: Items 31+38 = Income
3 Divide: Debt ÷ Income = Debt -to-Income Ratio
4 Round: To the nearest two digits
The “Debt -to-Income Ratio” heading in Topic 10, subsection b of this chapter contains 
special procedures to apply if the ratio exceeds 41 percent.
Only the borrower's actual income may be used to calculate the residual income.
Care should be exercised to ensure that the income considered tax -exempt is likely to 
continue and remain untaxed.
Continued on  next page

--- PAGE 52 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-52Topic 9 : How to Complete VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis, continued
b.Debt -to-Income Ratio – Item 44, continued  
Tax- free income includes certain military allowances, child support payments, workers’ 
compensation benefits, disability retirement payments, and certain types of public assistance  
payments. 
Verify that the income is indeed tax -free before “grossing up.”
Tax- free income may be “grossed up” for purposes of calculating the debt -to- income ratio 
only.
·This is a tool that may be used to lower  the debt ratio for borrowers who clearly qualify 
for the loan.
·“Grossing up” involves adjusting the income upward to a pre- tax or gross  income  
amount which, after deducting state  and Federal  income taxes, equals the tax- exempt 
incom
e.
·Use current  IRS and state income  tax withholding tables  to determine an  amount which 
can be prudently employed to adjust  the borrower’s actual income. Use a figure of 125 
percent of the borrower’s non - taxable income when “grossing up.”
·Do not add non-taxable  income  to taxable  income  before  “grossing up.”
·If “grossing up” is used, indicate such and provide the “grossed up” ratio of 125 percent 
in item 47, “Remarks.” The actual amounts of the borrower’s non- taxable income 
should not be adjusted in in line 38.
c.Past Credit Record – Item 45  
Indicate whether the borrower (and spouse, if applicable) is a satisfactory or unsatisfactory 
credit risk based on a complete analysis of credit data.

--- PAGE 53 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-53Topic 10: How to Analyze the Information on VA Form 26 -6393, 
Loan Analysis
Change Date : February 22, 2019
·This chapter has been revised in its entirety.  
a.Resi
dual Income  
VA’s minimum residual incomes (balance available for family support) are a guide. They 
should not automatically trigger approval or rejection of a loan. Instead, consider residual 
income in conjunction with all other credit factors.
However, an inadequate residual income alone can be a basis for disapproving a loan.
If residual income is marginal, look to other indicators such as the borrower’s credit history, 
and in pa
rticular, whether and how the borrower has previously handled similar housing 
expense.
Consider the ages of the borrower’s dependents in determining the adequacy of residual 
income.
b.Debt -to-Income Ratio  
VA’s  debt-to- income  ratio is a ratio of total monthly  debt payments (housing expense, 
installment debts, and other obligations listed in section D of VAForm 26-6393, Loan 
Analysis , to gross  monthly income. I t is a guide and, as an underwriting factor, it is 
secondary to the residual income.  It should not automatically trigger approval or rejection of 
a loan. Instead, consider the ratio in conjunction with all other credit factors.
A ratio greater  than 41  percent  requires close  scrutiny unless:
·the ratio  is greater  than 41 percent  unless  it is larger  due solely  to the existence of tax -
free income which should be noted in the loan file), the loan may be approved with 
justification, by the underwriter's supervisor, or
·residual  income  exceeds the guideline by at  least 20 percent.
Loans closed automatically  with a debt-to- income  ratio greater  than 41 percent:
·Include a statement justifying the reasons for approval, signed by the underwriter’s 
supervisor, unless  residual  income  exceeds the guideline by at least 20 perc ent.
·The statement must include the reason(s) for approving the loan and list the 
compensating factors justifying approval of the loan.
c.Credit History  
A poor credit history alone is a basis for disapproving a loan.
If credit history is marginal, look t o other factors such as residual income .
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 54 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-54Topic 10 : How to Analyze the Information on VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis, continued
d. Compensating Factors 
Compensating factors may affect the loan decision. These factors are especially  important  
when  reviewing loans which are marginal  with respect  to residual income or debt-to- income 
ratio.  They cannot be used to compensate for unsatisfactory credit.
Valid compensating factors should represent strengths rather than mere satisfaction of basic 
program requirements.  For example, the fact that a borrower  has sufficient  assets  for closing 
purposes, or meets  the residual income guideline, is not a compensating factor.
Valid compensating factors should logically be able to compensate (to some extent)  for the 
identified  weakness  in the loan. For example,  significant  liquid assets may compensate for a 
residual income shortfall whereas long -term employment would not.
Compensating factors  include, but are  not limited  to the  following:
·excellent  credit  history,
·conservative  use of consumer  credit,
·minimal  consumer  debt,
·long- term employment,
·significant  liquid  assets,
·sizable  downpayment,
·the existence  of equity in refinancing  loans,
·little or no increase  in shelter  expense,
·milit ary benefits,
·satisfactory  homeownership experience,
·high residual  income,
·low debt-to- income  ratio,
·tax credits for  child  care,  and
·tax benefits of home ownership.
e.Com
pare Previous and Proposed Shelter Expenses  
Closely scrutinize a case in which the borrower will be paying significantly higher shelter 
expenses than he or she currently pays.
Consider the:
·ability of the borrower to accumulate liquid assets, and
·amount of debts incurred while paying a less amount for shelter.
If a borrower’s application  shows little or no reserves and excessive obligations, it may not 
be reasonable to conclude that a substantial increase in shelter expenses can be absorbed.
Continued on next page

--- PAGE 55 ---
VA Lenders Handbook M26 -7
Chapter 4: Credit Underwriting
4-55Topic 10 : How to Analyze the Information on VA Form 26-6393, Loan Analysis, continued
f.Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)  
Asa result  of releases  of Home Mortgage  Disclosure  Act(HMDA)  data,  many lenders are 
increasingly concerned that they are taking all appropriate measures  to assure  access  by 
minorities  and lower  income  households to home mortgage loans. VA believes that it is 
important for l enders to be aware of how effectively the VA Home Loan Program can assist 
them in meeting this goal.
Compatibility  of VA Program with  HMDA
The no down payment feature is, of course, a primary advantage for individuals with low-to-
moderate incomes.  However, lenders should not overlook other aspects  of the VA program  
that will help in underwriting loans for such borrowers. VA Credit Standards are written as 
guidelines and are meant  to be interpreted  and used just that way,  taking into consideration all 
of an individual loan borrower’s financial, employment and family circumstances.
Purpose  of HMDA
VA encourages underwriters to find ways to approve loan applications which ought to be 
approved but may not appear  approvable upon  direct  application  of the credit standards.
Underwriters are encouraged to give consideration to every possible appropriate  factor  in 
seeking a proper basis  for approving loan applications  for every qualified Veteran.